Education, College, College-Application-Essay
Cornelius Vanderbilt Application
Matthew Stuart Jones
12/30/2004
1
If you had asked the younger me what I wanted to do when I grew up, I would have responded
with a wide range of answers, but anything to do with engineering was never one of them. As a curious
child watching my parents in their respective fields of civil and electrical engineering, I couldn’t fathom a
career involving that much math. As I grew up, I began to overhear complex conversations that my
brother (a computer science major) and father would have surrounding computer languages that I didn’t
speak, cybersecurity systems that I couldn’t wrap my head around, and physics equations that I didn’t
understand. Over time, a wonder of how these systems are possible grew inside of me and, as I continued
to mature, the answers to my questions about the physical world began venturing into a new realm:
mathematics. Taking AP Physics taught me that the key to the questions I was asking was math and that I
loved math more than I ever thought I did.
Last year, I gave a presentation about the vast possibilities of the future of artificial intelligence,
researching the growth of artificial intelligence and how close we are to the singularity. I was amazed at
how close the world is to self-aware AI, but my research also guided my curiosity in a different direction.
The question of what AI will look like in 20 years is a wild prospect; however, I want to be able to make
an impact with my collegiate education right now. Learning about the up-and-coming metaverse and all of
the new ways the internet can grow in the next few years piqued my interest in identifying the regulations
surrounding how companies store data, and the truth is staggering. There are no federal laws restricting
data privacy, and every day this becomes a more glaring failure by many governments worldwide. With
data breaches becoming a near-everyday occurrence, the white lies of companies saying that your
information is safe couldn’t be further from the truth. Even if no one has direct access to your
information, it can still be breached, and it can still be stolen.
I am pursuing a computer science undergraduate degree with a pre-law track in order to make a
difference in this field. The public needs to be protected from data attacks that they are completely

Cornelius Vanderbilt Application
Matthew Stuart Jones
12/30/2004
2
unaware of, and by receiving these degrees I will have the tools necessary to pursue the creation of
legislation to protect the public. Still a senior in high school, I don’t yet know the best way to pursue this
dream of being a leading voice in the protection of public information, yet I am confident that these are
the most important first steps for me to take as I begin my journey to address this worldwide issue.

