Education, College, Anthropology-102, Assignment
Fantastical archaeological claims have always had roots in media and culture,
however, with the rise of the internet and mass communication, the realm of fantastical
archaeology has been left to cancerously grow. Not only do these videos and articles
spread false claims, but they have broad ethical and cultural implications that are far more
dangerous than the brainwashing of someone watching YouTube. This video about the socalled melted stonework of Tambomachay falls under this category, using repetitive gish
gallop claims to stun the viewer into submission. Rather, the truth behind the Incan
stonework at Tambomachay is a much grander tale that draws upon the geological
engineering skills, masonry skills, and the incredible cosmology of the Incan people.
The geological engineering skills of the ancient Inca drew upon a need to combat
the disparity between the heavy rainfall that occurred from May to November in
comparison to the other dry months. One option for this is surface water storage, however
that requires more manual labor and intervention, and is risky. Therefore, the Inca used a
system of geologic water storage, which is a system that stores water in the voids between
geologic bodies or layers, using reservoirs, cisterns, or other holding spaces. These allow
for water to come in and stay in one area, while not being aDected by contamination or
other natural hazards. This research was done by J.P. Fairley and was based on a scientiﬁc
approach using calculations of the water ﬂow. He concluded based on his on-sight
observations and calculations that this is how the Inca maintained enough water for their
people, and this geological water storage is present at Tambomachay, in the form of water
ornaments and gorgeous displays.
The evidence for the masonry skills of the Inca also disproves the idea that their
stone was melted, destroyed, or in some type of war. Jean-Pierre Protzen studied several
Incan quarry archaeological sites and determined that there is extensive physical evidence
left behind from their quarrying to show that they did mine lots of stone. There are lots of
cut marks on blocks left at sites such as Kachiqhata, and there are clear marks of where
ramps and roads were maintained to allow for the sliding of large blocks. Protzen also used
experimental archaeology to show how it was in the Inca’s power to carve very straight
edges to their stones, using sandstone and pounding rocks to clean and face rocks. There
is also a primary source from Garcilaso de la Vega that Protzen puts out in his research,
which oDers ﬁrst person support of Protzen’s experiments. De la Vega describes the Inca
using stone pounders rather than tools, like how the ancient Egyptians used dolerite in
their quarries. These scientiﬁc experiments clearly disprove the argument that the
technology to build these walls lies outside the abilities of the Inca and contests the claim
that no scholars have ever studied Tambomachay or the other countless Inca sites.
In terms of the cosmology of the ancient Inca, a leader in Incan cosmology, Carolyn
Dean, describes the Quechua tale that the ancient Inca married Pachamama (Mother
Earth), and their union symbolized a joining of the Inca and their structures and the natural
world. This led them to incorporate natural stone outcroppings into their stonework to
create tinkuy points, or intersections between two diDerent entities, in this case, the Inca
masonry and Pachamama. This combats the claim that the Inca stonework was melted at
some point, rather, the Inca built it to encompass natural features of the Earth, which was
misinterpreted by the creator of the video as a destruction of the wall. Dean uses a more
humanistic approach in her research, learning about the Incan past through understanding

the modern Quechua people and their traditions. Furthermore, as clearly stated by Dean
and evident in our current world, the Quechua, descendants of the ancient Inca, are a
current living society that still nurtures these traditions and beliefs. The video denying their
existence blatantly disregards their incredible culture and acts as if they don’t exist, which
isn’t fair to learning the truth about the ancient Inca, nor is it respectful to the current
Quechua citizens of the world.
The melted stonework of Tambomachay has clearly not been created by aliens or
attacked by some unknown army; rather is a complex creation of the wonderful Inca people
through their understanding of geology, masonry, and their cosmology. Furthermore, to
disprove yet another incorrect point that the video wrongly makes, the stone is not
unimaginably old, but is merely ~500 years old, as Tambomachay was built in the 1500s.

