Education, College, Graduate-school, Priority
My inspiration for pursuing research in AI has come from an eagerness to solve the biggest problems I can with the skills that I have. With AI being the great challenge and opportunity that it is, I want to create evidence-based contributions in the insertion of AI into society. 
As a current junior at the University of Kentucky, I have had numerous experiences in human-centered AI already. 
AI Recommendations for the Martin School of Public Policy
This last semester, I had the privilege to work on a group project in my Ethics and Civic Leadership policy class to research and present AI education recommendations to the Martin School of Public Policy. Our goal was to implement rules for AI usage in the classroom and augment the four-year plan for undergraduates to include work in AI policy. As the only computer scientist on the team, I provided a link between technical topics discussed from Computer Science Faculty and explained current approaches that universities are taking. This provided hands-on experience in policy evaluation, and the opportunity to practice presenting highly technical topics to a non-technical audience.
Human-Centered and Explainable AI Independent Study 
This semester, I have worked with Dr. Brent Harrison on studying the legislative impacts of responsible AI (RAI) research. By conducting a literature review of a few well-known AI-focused conferences, we are studying whether this research has attributed or been used to create our current AI legislation. 
LLM Based AI Research for NSF ACCESS
As an AI researcher at the UK Center for Computational Sciences, I have had the opportunity to create and implement multiple LLM based solutions to problems our team faces. We work under an NSF support grant for ACCESS, a HPC cyberinfrastructure program for researchers. I have learned a lot about MCP, RAG, and AI systems through LLM based categorizers, classifiers, and recommender systems.
Worcester Polytechnic Institute REU
This coming summer I will be working at WPI to study AI-powered systems for social good. While I don’t have my project assignment yet, some possible projects are working on systems for detecting early diseases through AI inferencing systems in wearable health technology, or other programs that identify at-risk veterans.

I will be applying to Ph.D. programs in computer science this coming fall. Long term, I am seeking a career path as a researcher who informs AI policy and governance, and a humane technologist. I envision myself as a highly educated researcher who has the technical grounding to give impactful testimony to develop benevolent AI systems and legislation that respects and benefits diverse perspectives and communities.
As seen by my experience, I have taken strides towards succeeding in my future graduate program. That said, I need all the assistance and funding that I can possibly receive as I approach graduate school and the financial trade-offs between a corporate job. I deserve this scholarship because I have been a 4.0 student at Kentucky and have excelled in every way that the college of engineering could have hoped I would.

