Education, High-School, English-Classes, Essays

This is a research paper that I completed for my junior year (of high school) english class, AP Language and composition.


Tourism in High Altitude Locations: A Report on the Greed of Western Societies
A peak that is 29,029 feet tall. A mountain that has killed one person for every four that
have reached the summit. As the world’s tallest mountain, Mount Everest has a coveted place in
the world and is a dream of any serious climber. Here is where Jon Krakauer comes in, an
outdoorsman and author for Outside magazine. As a serious climber himself, he had always
wondered about climbing Everest, so when his publisher gave him a feasible option for his climb
and a subsequent article that he would publish after returning home, he couldn't resist. However,
what he would find on Everest is more astonishing than he could have imagined. From the mobs
of tourists climbing the mountain, to the Sherpas pushing themselves past their own breaking
points to prove their worth, Jon Krakauer has shed light on the massively corrupt system rotting
out the West’s tourism on Everest. The standard way of thinking about tourism in less developed
high-altitude places is that it provides economic opportunities and helps out the local community.
However, despite the economic stimulus that high mountain tourism provides local residents, the
greed-filled nature of the West ultimately degrades local communities in a multitude of ways,
proving that, contrary to popular belief, Western Tourism is not beneficial to local communities
in high altitude locations.
Primarily, the basis of Western Tourism in high altitude locations like Mount Everest is
manifested in an objectifying attitude that exploits locals for their skills and bodies. Ever since
the first Everest expedition of 1922 that used Nepalese porters known as Sherpas to help carry
bags up the mountain, there has been a status quo that western climbers need Sherpa support to
climb the mountain. This partnership in itself is not inherently evil, however, the power that the
West uses in its discriminatory practices against Sherpas has fostered a relationship that identifies
the Sherpas as nothing but a helper to the western climber, whereas the work that Sherpas do is

not equivocal to this. Furthermore, tourism and western climbing expeditions of Everest have
massively increased in popularity. Globally, “international tourist arrivals have nearly doubled
since 2000, reaching 1.3 billion in 2017” (Mantel 947). Likewise, Mount Everest has seen its fair
share of these 1.3 billion, exacerbating the monetary divide between Western Guides and
Sherpas. Typically, per two-month climbing season, (there are two climbing seasons per year)
Sherpas are paid anywhere from $4,000 to $6,000 (Schaffer et al). This is much less than the
$50,000 plus tips that the Western guides are paid, and the Sherpa's work is both more dangerous
and taxing. Sherpas will “fix ropes, stock camps, and shuttle client’s gear, food, tents, and
oxygen up and down the mountain” ( Schaffer et al). Additionally, it has been scientifically
proven that Sherpas burn fewer calories when carrying heavy loads than any other group of
humans on Earth (Inman 1), and because of this, they are often in charge of carrying overweight
loads. This is one of the reasons that Sherpas are indispensable to the commercialization of
Everest, as Sherpas are needed to carry tourists' gear. Furthermore, Sherpas are responsible for
setting long lines of rope ahead of the climbing party. This is incredibly dangerous because they
have to climb without guidelines, and oftentimes they have to travel ahead of the group. As the
first ones inspecting the mountain, they are the ones that have to deal with unexpected conditions
high up on the mountain, thus leading to a death being 10 times more likely than the most
dangerous nonmilitary job in the US (Schaffer et al). This increased risk also coincides with a
lack of insurance for Sherpas. In recent years, laws have been set in place that forces expeditions
to have $4,000 in rescue insurance and $575 in medical insurance (Schaffer et al); however,
these improvements are for naught. In high altitudes, usually, helicopter rescues are the only
viable options for evacuating Sherpas, and these cost $15,000, more than expeditions will almost
ever pay. These facts result in 174 Sherpa deaths in the Himalayas, with 15 in the past decade of

2011-2021. However, Sherpas continue to push themselves past their own breaking points to
prove themselves to Western expedition leaders and their local peers. As only a certain amount
of Sherpas are needed, oftentimes they work while sick and injured to prove they are reliable
workers. While Krakauer was on the mountain, he witnessed a Sherpa named Lopsang exhaust
themself while carrying Sandy Pittman, in hopes she would somehow publicize his efforts to
help her (Krakauer 176). The famous American guide Scott Fischer once “told writer Jon
Krakauer, ‘We’ve built a yellow brick road to the summit…’ it’s Sherpas who do the
construction and, all too often, become its casualties” (Schaffer et al). The money that Western
Expeditions make off Everest is built off of this exploitation, but as long as the tourists keep
coming, this exploitation will just continue to grow. Cumulatively, this story builds a narrative
that speaks to the mistreatment of Sherpas, built on a Western need for their abilities.
Likewise, these exploitative attitudes aren't only seen on Everest. A study carried out on
the social effects of tourism development in Kinabalu National Park in Malaysia showed
detrimental societal effects. While tourism can encourage a renewal of the local culture, it can
also arouse differences between religious, ethnic, and cultural groups (Jaafar, et al. 11).
Furthermore, there is a new societal urge to ‘see it while you still can.’ First identified in the
Great Barrier Reef in Australia, endangered locations across the world are seeing increases in
tourism as society worries that soon they will be destroyed (Manuel 948). This international
phenomenon accumulates more people in tourist areas, exponentially increasing all the poor
effects of tourism. Culturally, this increase in tourism can lead to renewals of previously fought
battles over land and as well as cultural disputes that tourists don’t understand. Moreover,
increases in tourism are directly related to increases in crime and prostitution in an area (Jaafar,
et al. 12). It has been shown that a local culture’s previous morals are adjusted with an influx of

outside people, hurting both local culture and crippling local community structures and family
relationships. Costa Rica has also seen effects parallel to this, as Archeologist Richard Leventhal
witnessed. As the director of the Museum of Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania, he
took frequent trips to Cancun, Mexico. Originally in 1972 when he traveled there for the first
time, he saw beautiful grass huts bordering the island’s white-sand beaches. However, 20,000
hotel rooms housing 2.6 million tourists a year now leave no room for any resemblance to the
community that used to reside there (Cox 867). As a direct result of these changes, the local
community is destroyed of its previous culture, leaving behind nothing but modern business and
an area bent on maximizing profits off of tourists. These societal changes also coincide with a
sudden change in the local economy of a tourist location. Modern tourism has greatly changed
the playing field with new popularity in services such as Airbnb, which has added an estimated
extra 15 percent of visitors in certain locations (Mantel 952). Through this and other modern
services, local economies in less developed countries quickly turn to service industries and drop
their farming lifestyles for the tourism industry. However, this is a prime opportunity for more
greed from Western companies, as they step in and get a hand in the profit pool. This leads to the
astounding fact that “up to half of the tourism revenue entering the developing world reverts to
the developed world in profits earned by foreign-owned businesses” (Cox 868). Western
society's ignorance and greed for profit off of local communities leads to all of these things, so
while tourists enjoy beautiful views of new places, they are destroying the foundation of the
society they are standing on, proving why increases in tourism in an area are not actually
beneficial.
Admittedly, however, the economic benefits of tourism are substantial and meaningful in
less developed countries, offering a reason to espouse international tourism. Put simply, tourism

greatly increases the economic opportunity of local residents. On Mount Everest, even though
Sherpas are making far less than their Western Guide counterparts, the couple thousand dollars
they make is significantly more than the $575 that the average Nepalese person makes
(Marketplace Contributor). Furthermore, when compared with their local farming jobs, people in
these less developed countries will jump to new service sector job opportunities in the tourist
industry (Cox 869). Workers are prone to make these decisions as they offer more job security,
better benefits, and the opportunity of the “American Dream” in their own countries. Also,
oftentimes in rapidly developing tourist spots, infrastructure in a local area will be forced to
expand to allow for the ensuing tourists, leading to increased social services and available public
transportation (Jaafar, et al 10). This will help local communities thrive with additional economic
opportunities not seen prior simply due to new highways and transportation systems.
Furthermore, these communities often open new recreational facilities such as parks and sports
fields. Local residents will feel more attached to their community and have an urge to be active
outside their homes, building relationships that are vital to their livelihoods. Ultimately, the
success of local tourism is directly linked to the quality of life of the residents of that area
(Jaafar, et al 10). Their quality of life is built out of their well-being, satisfaction, and standard of
living. As seen by all the ensuing infrastructure improvements, the success of local tourism is
apparent as it leads to better communities. However, this belief does not take into account the
environmental effect that this mass tourism system and rapid infrastructure improvement causes.
Fundamentally, the worst cause of Western mass tourism in less developed areas,
specifically high altitude locations, is the inescapable climate destruction that the tourism leads
to. The climate effects of mountain tourism are far-reaching, however, they all attack someone's
well-being and lifestyle by targeting the amount of money that an area can make. In many Asian

mountain ranges, there is an impact on the amount of snowfall leading to worse conditions for
subsistence farming. This is detrimental to these areas, as many people in less developed
countries still live off of their herds of sheep and yaks. Over time there is less and less snowfall,
causing a lower amount of plant density (Palomo 180). Vegetation shrinkage is also linked to an
increase in hikers that trample over plants (Mantel 951). Subsequently, the drop in vegetation
leads to reductions in subsistence farming, causing economically ravaged communities.
Furthermore, natural disasters are overly common in recent years. All across the world from the
mountains in Austria to the Khumbu region of Nepal, streams that weave through mountain
communities and serve countless people are drying up due to ravaging droughts. The Khumbu
valley, first described by Sir Edmund Hillary-the famous Everest climber- as ‘superbly forested’
is now an ‘eroding desert’ after 25,000 trekkers have visited this place near Everest (Cox 869).
These droughts don’t just dry up the ground though, as they leave communities without water,
creating a necessity for bottled water to be shipped in. As these are less developed countries with
little to no international voice, however, more often than not they are forgotten about and left to
deal with climate effects caused by a Westerner’s doing all on their own. Moreover, these natural
disasters aren't only limited to droughts, as worldwide flooding is now common. As permafrost
melts in high-altitude glaciers, there are a greater number of high mountain lakes, which directly
cause glacial lake outburst floods (Palomo 180). A result of these is a higher number of rockfalls,
landslides, and the destruction of mountaineering trails. These trails being destroyed then means
that the little money these communities were making off Western Tourism is now cut off. This is
a prime example of how Western tourism invades local communities, reaps money off the land,
and leaves a barren landscape in their wake. Eventually, this cycle will trace back to the Western
countries, but by then the effects will be colossal in less developed countries. Proven by the

United Nations World Tourism Organization, “the tourism industry generates four times more
CO2… than thought” (Mantel 963). Eventually, the climate effects will begin destroying the
Western Societies just as they are the less developed countries that they invade. Cumulatively
though, Western tourism is not beneficial to local communities in less developed mountain
countries based on its massive ecological effects.
The exploitation that Jon Krakauer uncovered is a serious and pressing issue that needs to
be addressed immediately, or else devastating climate change will continue, and lives will
continue to be taken advantage of. A plausible solution is the implementation of
well-thought-out limitation rules for tourists, and countries such as Thailand, Barcelona, and
Dubrovnik have all passed legislation like this. However, Barcelona’s rules didn’t work because
they limited beds within the city limits, so day travelers could still visit, exemplifying that the
solutions to this massive problem of worldwide tourism are not easy to fix (Mantel 949).
Specifically in the mountains of Nepal though, their attempt “was a prime example of how not to
do tourism in the Third World” (Cox 869). Their plan was to let as many people in as they could,
and this simply did not work. Summatively, countries need to craft a plan that works for their
own country to stop the exploitative force of Western tourism in order to protect them from the
horrible effects of the greed of Western business.

Contributor, Marketplace. “The Costs of Climbing Mount Everest.” Marketplace, Minnesota
Public Radio, 21 Apr. 2014, https://www.marketplace.org/2014/04/21/costs-climbingmount-everest/.
Cox, Rachel S. "Ecotourism." CQ Researcher, 20 Oct. 2006, pp. 865-88, library.cqpress.com/cq
researcher/cqresrre2006102000.
Inman, Mason. “Nepalese Porters Are World’s Most Effective Carriers.” Science Now, June
2005, p. 1. EBSCOhost,
https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=sch&AN=17356208&site=scirc
-live.
Jaafar, Mastura, et al. “Perceived Social Effects of Tourism Development: A Case Study of
Kinabalu National Park.” Theoretical and Empirical Researches in Urban Management,
vol. 10, no. 2, Research Center in Public Administration and Public Services, 2015, pp.
5–20, http://www.jstor.org/stable/24873524.
Mantel, Barbara. "Global Tourism Controversies." CQ Researcher, 9 Nov. 2018, pp. 945-68,
library.cqpress.com/cqresearcher/cqresrre2018110900.
Palomo, Ignacio. “Climate Change Impacts on Ecosystem Services in High Mountain Areas: A
Literature Review.” Mountain Research and Development, vol. 37, no. 2, International
Mountain Society, 2017, pp. 179–87, http://www.jstor.org/stable/90009005.
Schaffer, Grayson, et al. “The Disposable Men: Sherpas on Everest.” Outside Online, Outside,
26 June 2021, https://www.outsideonline.com/outdoor-adventure/climbin
g/disposable-man-western-history-sherpas-everest/.

