Education, College, College-ApplicationEssay
Describe a time when you were a changemaker who positively impacted yourself
or others. (4000 Characters)
Drive is an essential force in life- an active, determined passion that pushes
us toward a goal, a place, or a moment. When someone is driven, it can be
inspiring not only for themselves but for those around them. Without drive, the best
we can hope for is stagnation, and at worst, we risk decline in various aspects of
life. Last year during a pivotal moment in my a cappella group’s history, I
embarked on an ongoing mission: to ignite a renewed sense of drive within our
group, one that would carry us to new heights and exciting opportunities.
The acoUstiKats had an incredible year, delivering stunning performances
and wowing audiences for two semesters. However, by February and March, we
began to stagnate as we considered the future. With the core of our group being
seniors, it became clear that the responsibility to uphold our culture and traditions
would soon fall to the underclassmen. In conversations with my peers, much of the
focus was on reminiscing about how great the year had been and how much we
would miss the graduating seniors. While those memories are wonderful, we still
had-and have- more time to create, and it would be a disservice to the legacy of the
graduating members if we didn’t take full advantage of the time we have left to
ensure the group’s continued success. I began thinking about how I could
contribute to the group’s continued success, and one powerful idea came to mind:
social media.
Although our social media accounts had been managed by group members in
the past, no one had truly had an affinity for the role. I believed I had something to
offer, so I took charge and began creating content to revitalize our online presence.
Though it may sound cliché, I genuinely believed that a stronger online presence
could propel the acoUstiKats back to the forefront of UK, making us a group
everyone knew and talked about. This publicity, in turn, would fuel the drive that
we needed to secure our place in acoUstiKats history.
My motivation for encouraging my fellow Kats to think about the future
stemmed from my desire to preserve our legacy. Every few years, there is an
evident theme in the group. There are countless titles of different generations of
acoUstiKats going back to the group’s founding 31 years ago, and I refuse to allow
our legacy to be that of a down decade for the acoUstiKats. While my role as a
changemaker may seem small compared to starting a nonprofit or solving bigger
problems, I believe that these everyday actions within our own circles can have a
profound impact on our futures. The success of my social media plan is yet to be
fully seen, but one thing is clear-for now, the group is as strong as ever.

Reflecting on your experience traveling in the US or abroad, why do you want to
participate in this program? (4000 Characters)
With my feet nestled in the warm, smooth sand of Luquillo Beach, the gentle
rhythm of the waves mingling with the beat of reggaetón from nearby umbrellas, I
gazed out at the crystal-blue waters and knew: Puerto Rico was the perfect
vacation destination. From kayaking in the rainforest to beach days spent eating
fresh seafood and soaking up the sun, this trip to Puerto Rico solidified my love of
adventure. Not only through traipsing through rainforests and snorkeling, but also
through trying new, extravagant foods, and becoming enamored by a culture that I
had only ever read about in Spanish class. Ultimately, this wild and exciting trip to
Puerto Rico led me straight down a path to finding the next Hispanic community
that I would visit, and sure enough, it will be Bilbao, Spain, next Spring.
There were a few key moments on this specific trip that really helped my
love of adventure flourish, the first being the food that I was able to try. Being a
food network aficionado, I knew prior to traveling that I really wanted to try
ceviche because we were in the Caribbean! Therefore, at one of my first
opportunities, I ordered a big bowl of it for lunch. As anyone familiar with ceviche
knows, it’s typically served as a shared appetizer to avoid overwhelming the
stomach. However, I eagerly devoured a large portion on my own. And no, it didn’t
go over well. Even still, I am immensely proud of myself and fond of the
experience that I had to try this wonderful dish! In the same light as going
kayaking through a rainforest on a (sort of) foreign island, trying ceviche was an
adventurous opportunity that allowed me to experience something completely new,
and I hunger for more chances to enjoy and take part in new customs just like this
one.
In the same light as trying new foods, but in a different circumstance, the
other key moment on this influential trip was simply a conversation in a parking
lot. Adventurous, I know! Yet, this brief conversation had a profound effect on me,
sparking a desire for more experiences like it. My family and I had just parked our
car at a natural waterslide park on the island, but the parking lot was extremely
tiny. Jamming our rental minivan onto a small strip of gravel, we had no idea if we
were allowed to park there. So, having taken the most amount of Spanish in the
family, it was my responsibility to ask the people in the car over if we were
allowed to park there. Giddy to use my Spanish for real, I hopped right up from my
seat, put on my game face, and walked over. As soon as I saw the other people
though, I froze. It felt like I was back in Spanish One, foraging for words in
Spanish that resembled a real sentence asking whether a car could park. Receiving

a nod, I brushed myself off and headed back over to my car. In that moment, I
never could have contemplated remembering that conversation over two years
later. Nevertheless, I can recite word for word how it went, and I have realized how
fantastic what I did was. I communicated with someone I would never have been
able to reach without knowledge of a second language. Now, I understand that I
didn’t glean any world-shattering insight from this person, but I can only imagine
the stories and wisdom that can be gleaned from talking and sharing stories with
people from completely different backgrounds. For this, I cannot wait to have real
conversations with Spaniards that go way deeper than talking about parking a car.
Ultimately, the thrill of new experiences, from tasting unfamiliar foods to the
opportunity to immerse myself into a rich history I once only read about, has
fueled my desire to travel abroad again-to see, feel, and embrace the wonders that
await.

Describe your involvement with the UK campus. (4000 Characters)
As an active participant in the College of Fine Arts, I am a member of the
UK Men’s Chorus and its pop a cappella subset, the acoUstiKats. Our group
specializes in performing male-led hits from the 70s onwards. In addition to
performing, I serve as the social media chair for the acoUstiKats, managing our
Instagram account to engage our audience and attract more attendees to our shows.
With both the acoUstiKats and the Men’s Chorus meeting twice weekly and
performing regularly, much of my remaining time is dedicated to my coursework.
However, I am actively pursuing Computer Science research positions this
semester to deepen my involvement in my major’s department.
Describe your engagement with communities and cultures different than your own.
(4000 Characters)
The disbanding of DEI programs and a stark rise in outspoken racism have
sparked critical conversations about how comfortable people are with those from
different backgrounds. In these challenging times, I am proud to commit myself
daily to becoming more open and inclusive than I was the day before. I deeply
value the knowledge and wisdom that diverse groups bring to the table, and I strive
to treat everyone I meet with the same respect, love, and care that I extend to my
closest friends.
To foster inclusivity, I actively work to recognize and mitigate my inherited
biases when meeting new people. Acknowledging my identity as a middle-class

white man from the suburbs-someone who has benefited from privilege-is crucial
in confronting and unlearning these biases. To challenge these, the best approach is
to engage openly with people from different communities, learning from their
experiences to become a better ally and human being.
Beyond recognizing personal faults, extending love and kindness to those we
meet is crucial in embracing our neighbors. Without this openness, we create
barriers that hinder communication, preventing us from sharing and hearing stories
that broaden our worldview. Fundamentally, this is why people need to be more
accepting-it allows us to share our stories and become closer to those around us.

How are you preparing to engage with your program’s host culture and
community? (4000 Characters)
When asked, many people are familiar with Catalonia, a region in Northeast
Spain housing a group of people lacking sovereignty. Following a surge of
activism and protests in the late 2010s, Catalonia gained global attention. For
nearly 30 years, the Catalonians faced genocide and mass persecution under the
Spanish dictator Francisco Franco (1939-1975). By the turn of the century, they
were ready to revolt against their colonizers. Meanwhile, the Basque region to the
west endured similar persecution and lack of governance but remains less
discussed. Despite their struggles, the Basque people, centered around their largest
city, Bilbao, have cultivated a rich and passionate culture within their stunning
mountainous landscape. However, what they are now is nothing to discount their
history and struggles. As I prepare to live in Bilbao, I am eager to immerse myself
in the culture and gain a deeper understanding of the experiences and emotions of
the Basque people.
To start, I am taking a class titled “Basque: Culture and Language” which
will provide and academic foundation for the nuts and bolts of the Basque ethnic
group. Being interested in the ethnicity’s history and the impact of the oppressive
governments on the lifestyles of its peoples, I am eager to hear the history taught
directly from professors who have lived through these defining events. However, to
truly grasp how these events have shaped the Basque people, I believe that
conversations and experiences outside the classroom will be essential. Eager to
wander through the downtown areas, see the art museums, and visit the beaches, I
am hoping to meet locals all throughout and be able to connect with them.
Beyond studying Basque history, I look forward to savoring the local
Mediterranean-Spanish fusion cuisine, including world famous dishes like Paella. I

am also about the possibility to play Padel and other traditional Spanish sports, and
perhaps even attending a Football game!

List your academic goals for participating in this program. (4000 Characters)
• Take the required Computer Science classes to stay on pace to graduate in
four years
• Learn about the local culture and history of the region
• Become a stronger Spanish speaker in classroom settings
• Earn grades equivalent to a 4.0 GPA at UK

List your professional goals for participating in this program. (4000 Characters)
• Through taking a data science class from their Data Science major, identify
whether that is a plausible career option for me
• Learn about how AI is impacting Europeans, whether it is in the same light
or different, as according to the European Union’s AI legislation.
List your personal goals for participating in this program. (4000 Characters)
• Become a stronger Spanish speaker in interpersonal situations
• Gain the ability to confidently travel to more remote Spanish speaking
countries
• Meet new people from other countries in the program to learn about other
lifestyles
• Immerse myself into the Basque culture
• Travel to surrounding European countries while I can

Reflecting on your goals above, what are some academic, professional, and
personal benefits, skill sets, or competencies you hope to gain through your
program? (4000 Characters)

From strengthening my graduate school application to becoming fluent in
Spanish for professional use, there are many logical reasons for wanting to study
abroad. But these logical reasons weren’t what made me excited to wake up on
Sunday mornings to research more programs. They weren’t what drove me to scour
the Computer Science four-year plan, searching for a way to make this work. They
weren’t the reason I sent countless emails to advisors and professors to piece
together this journey. While the tangible career benefits are undeniable, my true
motivation lies in personal growth. Just as college is about learning far more than
what’s taught in the classroom, studying abroad offers opportunities to expand my
worldview, open my eyes to new perspectives, and fully appreciate the privilege of
embarking on this journey.
One of my main goals is to immerse myself into the culture and lifestyle of
the Basque people. As mentioned in my other essays, I am preparing to equip
myself with all the knowledge necessary to fully engage with the local community.
The personal benefits of these interactions are numerous, from developing a deeper
empathy for other’s struggles to broadening my understanding of why growth and
change are essential in our world. My primary goal is to expand my humanity and
learn to connect with those that are different from me. I believe that mastering this
skill while abroad will have a lasting impact on both my life and professional
pursuits.
Another personal goal is to learn to cook like the Basque people. I am
excited to take a Basque cooking class while abroad, and I am eager to learn their
recipes and how they creatively utilize their rich array of local ingredients. One
famous Basque dish is a cheesecake with a slightly burnt crust that imparts a
deeper, smoky flavor. The opportunity to learn creative cooking techniques like
this fascinates me, and I’m eager to discover even more lesser-known culinary
traditions.
Overall, my goals for growth abroad are diverse, spanning from logical to
quirky aspirations. Each holds the chance to impact me long after I return, and I’m
excited to discover the unexpected benefits that will undoubtedly arise along the
way.

Describe how your goals, program choice, and program location are connected.
(4000 Characters)
A Spanish-speaking country, a university with courses that keep me on track
for graduation, and opportunities for vast new experiences-finding a program that
met all these criteria took extensive research, but the Universidad de Deusto
exceeded my expectations. From the rich Basque culture to the university’s strong

Data Science and AI programs, both the school and the city of Bilbao offer an
opportunity unlike any other.
As I have mentioned earlier, I am beyond excited to immerse myself in all
that the Basque region has to offer. Whether it’s exploring their complex history or
learning their wondrous cooking techniques, Northern Spain has so much to
contribute to my journey. With my proficiency in Spanish, I look forward to
engaging with the local community on a deeper level, and I’m eager to learn some
of the Basque language as well!
Beyond the culture and scenery of the region, Northern Spain offers a unique
advantage-I can visit many other European destinations along the way! With a trip
already planned through Southern France and Monaco, there are so many other
destinations that I can’t wait to visit.
Ultimately, it is all these opportunities-the new culture, community, classes,
people, destinations, and countries- that have led me to Bilbao, Spain. All these
reasons and examples I have listed point to one idea: my openness to the great
adventure that awaits me, and the wondrous learning experiences that lie ahead.

