Education, College, Communication-and-Composition, Project, Ted-Talk

This is the outline for a speech I gave in my freshman year comm and comp class at the University of Kentucky.

Speech Preparation Outline
NAME: Matthew Jones
Title of Speech: Elementary Education in the Age of Artificial Intelligence
Introduction
I.

Attention Catcher:

If I say the two words, “Artificial Intelligence,” I suspect there will be a few different reactions.
Some of us might be fearful of the future, some of us excited, but I suspect all of us will feel one
thing, and that is apprehensiveness.

II.

Listener Relevance Link (establish a connection with your audience):

There are so many unknowns about what all this new world of AI going to entail, but
something that can sometimes be left behind is education. Now, we all have talked about how AI
will allow people in school to cheat, but what about the other way around. How do educate our
youth about AI, not in the sense of warning them of the consequences of academic dishonesty but
preparing them for their life in the way schools are supposed to. With AI and its writing abilities,
do we completely scrap teaching children how to write essays to our youth? Do we bother
teaching little grammar and punctuation rules that any writing software can easily fix? In my
eyes, the answer is not a yes or no, rather a combination of forward thinking that involves
traditional education at its roots.

III.

Speaker Credibility (explain why you’re qualified to talk about this topic):

Earlier this semester, I had the privilege of listening to a presentation by a Dr. Bill HartDavidson, a researcher on AI and professor of culture and rhetoric at Michigan State. I am
fascinated by the future of AI in all fields, and Dr. Davidson gave some valuable insight into the
future of AI in K-12 education.
IV.

Thesis Statement:

I will delve deeper into the roots of the ideas that I am proposing throughout this
presentation, however, the groundwork of my proposal lies in this. By focusing more time on
teaching AI literacy in a holistic manner and less on irrelevant grammatical intricacies of the past,
children will be better equipped to handle the interactions they have with AI later in their
education as well as throughout their adult life.
V.

Preview (what you are going to talk about during your speech):

I will provide a brief background on what AI literacy is, and then I will describe and identify the
pros and cons of the possible outcomes of certain education decisions.

Transition:
Now, AI literacy isn’t just the understanding of how to ask Chat-GPT or any large language model
(or LLM) for more information, rather, AI literacy is the understanding of what it is doing to curate
your answer.
Body
I.

Basics of AI Literacy.

A. The first key idea in AI literacy is understanding how these LLM’s curate and
produce their information.
1. As I learned from Dr. Davidson, as the LLM forms your answer, the model makes
guesses as to what the next word should be, and then a transformer stems the words together:
2. So much is unknown about where these guesses come from, specifically what texts
are fed to the model to help it learn:
B. In an article by MIT Open Learning, it describes how the modeled human intuition of
AI that is built off statistics can lead students to make misdirected assumptions about work
produced by AI. This can lead students to have misconceptions about what they are submitting,
further proving how AI literacy is necessary in the classroom.

Transition:
All of this goes to show how important it is for AI literacy education to be rapidly implemented
into our K-12 education system, because without it, students have no idea as to what they are
really submitting when they turn in an essay written by Chat-GPT. So, with this, how are we
supposed to introduce children to AI?
II.
As one would expect, Stanford University is leading this charge, already deep into the
trials of their new CRAFT program.
A. An initiative between four different departments of the University alongside 10 high
school educators in varying subjects, from different schools.:
1. CRAFT is implementing new strategies for teaching AI in all subjects. Because
time in high school is so limited with the amount of work we expect high schoolers to do,
CRAFT focuses on implementing it into tasks that are essential for learning.
2. Since the program is newly developed and still well underway, information about
their trials in the classroom is limited, however examples of their work that have been released
range from watching how AI models react to hearing music to AI case studies in economics and
government:

B. However, implementing AI literacy education isn’t as easy as Stanford may make it
seem:
1. In a study published in the International Journal of STEM Education in May of
this year, researchers looked at different strategies used worldwide to start
introducing AI to our youth. During this process, they noticed a couple key
challenges that were the biggest hurdles for educators to figure out:
A. The first and hardest issue was that most AI training initiatives lack education
on the key areas of AI. These being understanding AI concepts and techniques,
understanding how to effectively use AI, and lastly, understanding how AI
impacts our lives.
B. The second issue for educators to solve was that AI is constantly changing,
and identifying the best way for educators to teach it while it evolves at an
exponential rate is quite difficult.
2. Ultimately, this is why Stanford’s work is so impressive to me. Against the odds of AI,
they have begun the arduous work of creating these opportunities for students.

Transition:
However, they aren’t the only ones who have made progress in the field.
III.
Globally and in the United States, more discoveries have been made as this issue makes
its way to the forefront.
A. Astonishingly, the United States is well ahead of all over countries in the world when
it comes to AI Education:
1. In the same study published in the International Journal of STEM Education,
researchers identified that the US has published more than double the amount of research in AI
Literacy than our closest competitor, China. Being primarily made up of conference papers and
research articles, this is an invaluable area of study for professionals to be investing in:
B. Fortunately, because there is this much information that has been published, this
research study was able to draw a few definitive conclusions:
1. First, as I stated earlier, because of the innate inter-disciplinary aspect of AI, there
is no need to introduce a new subject to students solely with the focus of AI. Like what Stanford
is implementing, the best strategy is to utilize new AI techniques inside experiments and learning
that students are already doing:
2. Something that I haven’t mentioned yet that this study did identify though, was
that a focus on teacher’s competence for AI needs to be started. If we are to help our next
generation with the battles they will face throughout their life, we need to start teaching and
preparing our teachers for these lessons now:

Transition:
These advancements in the field simply confirm the claim that AI literacy needs to become a part
of everyday education.

Conclusion
I.
Furthermore, as evidenced by research in the field, its not time to turn away from all
traditional education, rather extend upon what we already teach our kids while including
important messages about AI.:
II.

Summary of Main Points:

For me, it really all comes down to the massive amount of research that is being put out into the
public eye, proving that students need to have AI literacy to succeed in school and their careers.
II.

Clincher/Call to Action:
Just like we heard a couple weeks ago with the gubernatorial election, education is a
huge issue for voters here in Kentucky and nationally. So I encourage you, the next time
a politician or school board administrator starts talking about implementing AI literacy
into their educational goals, really give it a listen, and support it, because our next
generation needs all the help they can get, battling with AI and all its implications.

Links for information:
https://people.cal.msu.edu/hartdav2/
https://openlearning.mit.edu/news/ai-literacy-explained
https://hai.stanford.edu/news/bringing-ai-literacy-high-schools
https://stemeducationjournal.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40594-023-00418-7

